BCH311H - Biochemistry II: Nucleic Acids and Biological Information Flow
Winter 2014-2015
Coordinator and Lecturer: S. Andreopoulos
Office: Medical Sciences Building, Room 5219
e-mail: s.andreopoulos@utoronto.ca
Office Hours: Fridays 8:00-10am
Lecturers: S. Kelley
e-mail: shana.kelley@utoronto.ca
G. Brown
e-mail: grant.brown@utoronto.ca
Teaching Assistants: Gregory Cole
e-mail: gregory.cole@utoronto.ca
Mandeep Kaur Gill
e-mail: mk.gill@mail.utoronto.ca
Lectures: Con Hall, Fri 10 am– 12 pm
Tutorials: Thursday: Medical Sciences Building 2158, 1-2 pm
Friday: Con Hall, 1-2 pm
Academic Integrity: We would like to encourage you to practice honest and respectful behaviour in
keeping with the University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters: “The concern of the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters is with the responsibilities of all parties to the integrity of the
teaching and learning relationship, whose basis remains one of mutual respect for the aims of education
and for those ethical principles which must characterize the pursuit and transmission of knowledge in the
University”.
Course Description: This 12-week course covers the basics of nucleic acids and flow of information in
biological systems, There is a major focus on information storage and transmission, as well discussion on
new molecular technologies available.
Prerequisites: The prerequisite for the course is BCH210H (or equivalent credit). If this credit does not
appear on your ROSI record please contact Dr. Andreopoulos NO LATER than January 23rd, 2015 to
ensure your registration is maintained.
Course Conflicts with Exam Dates: If you have a UofT course conflict with ONE or BOTH term test
dates, you will need to inform Dr. Andreopoulos of this NO LATER than January 23rd, 2015, 5pm.
There are NO exceptions to the deadline. All emails must be received from a U of T account and include
your full name, student number, timetable and your course conflict.
Student Assessment: There will be two term tests, and a final examination. The first term test, worth
25% of the course mark, will cover all of Dr. Kelley's material (Lectures 1-4) and be held on Thursday
February 5th, 2015, 6-7:30 pm. The second term test, worth 25% of the course mark, covers all of Dr.
Brown's material (Lectures 5-7) and will be held on Thursday March 5th, 2015, 6-7:30 pm. The final
examination, worth 40% of the course mark, will cover all lectures, with more focus placed on Dr.
Andreopoulos’ material (Lectures 8-end). Students must check that their student numbers are correct and
that their grades are accurate when grades are released. Any discrepancies or problems with exam results
must be resolved BEFORE classes end. Any questions related to a specific lecture topic should be directed
to the Professor who gave the lecture.
Please note that the date for the April exam is arranged by the Faculty of Arts and Science. You cannot
miss an exam because you have purchased airline tickets, are on holiday etc. This is an intense 12-week
course, and your enrolment indicates a commitment to the lectures and evaluation process.
Quizzes - There will be two online quizzes worth 5% each, administered on the BCH311 Blackboard Site.
The quizzes (multiple choice answer format) will take place on Monday January 26th and Monday March
16th, 2015. The first quiz will cover the material in Lectures 1-3 while the second quiz will cover material
in Lectures 8-9. The quizzes will be 10 min long and will include 10 multiple-choice answer questions,
with either one CORRECT or one INCORRECT choice. Once you start the quizzes online, the system
will automatically log you off and submit whatever answers have been entered 10 minutes after the initial
start time.
Each student will be expected to take the quizzes independently without aids (ie. without notes, textbooks,
other resources etc.). The web-based quizzes will be available for 24 hours starting on the specified day at
12 AM Eastern Time Monday morning until 11:59 PM (ET). Students are responsible for arranging their
schedule to write the quizzes online. If you do not write a quiz, you will receive a grade of 0. NO
EXCEPTIONS will be made and there will be no makeup quizzes or re-allocation of the marks. The
discussion board on Blackboard will also not be accessible during the time when the quizzes are in
progress. Once you have written the quizzes, you may not discuss the questions with anyone. Marks will
be released the next day once the results of the quizzes have been compiled and analyzed. We cannot help
you if you have technical difficulties (ie. Wifi connection). If you are unsure of your internet connection,
computers are available in the libraries to take the quizzes.
Missed Term Tests: Students who miss either of the term tests MUST ADHERE to the following
procedure:
a) You MUST email (using Utoronto email) the Course Coordinator (Dr. Andreopoulos, MSB
5219) on the DAY of the term test. NO EXCEPTIONS will be considered. Only e-mails from the
UofT domain will be answered. Do NOT use yahoo/gmail/etc. These sources will be rejected as
spam.
b) Provide a valid University of Toronto student medical certificate for the DAY of the test. This
must be submitted to Dr. Andreopoulos PRIOR to the date of the make-up.
c) Provide via email a written explanation (no more than 200 words) detailing the reason for missing
the exam.
d) Provide via email your student number, course timetable and a list of all other course term work
due the week of the term test.
NOTICE: Upon submission of the above [(a)-(d)], students will be informed of the
date/time/location of the makeup exam (to be held several days after the date of the term test).
However, once you have written the makeup exam and there are any questionable issues with the
documentation supplied, a meeting will be arranged with Dr. Andreopoulos to discuss this.
If a test is NOT WRITTEN, a mark of zero will be assigned. Any student unable to write the final exam
must contact their college registrar.
Method of Delivery: The course content will be covered in one 2-hour formal lectures each week (see exact
schedule on Blackboard for dates and topics), with course notes provided in advance on Blackboard solely
for personal, noncommercial use. "All material in BCH311 Blackboard is, unless otherwise stated, the
property of the Department of Biochemistry at the University of Toronto. Copyright and other
intellectual property laws protect these material. Reproduction or retransmission of the materials, in
whole or in part, in any manner, without the prior written consent is a violation of copyright
law.” Help session tutorials are provided to assist with your understanding of the course material. Your
instructors and TAs are available to help, but please be courteous when contacting us via email and don’t
forget to use the discussion board for general questions. Remember, complex issues may be too time-
consuming to answer by e-mail; in this case it may be better to resolve these issues by meeting with the
professor after lecture or during office hours. In addition to lectures and tutorial handouts, additional
problem sets will be available online to help further your understanding of the material.
Class Participation: Activities, multiple-choice questions and problem-solving questions will be
provided in both lectures and tutorials, in order to measure your comprehension of ideas. If you have an
i>clicker, you are encouraged to bring it to class to participate in these questions, however, they will not
be used for attendance and no participation marks will be given. Your instructors will provide more
details on how you can be a part of this class, be more engaged in the material and enjoy learning why
biochemistry is crucial for life.
Technology in the classroom: Do feel free to bring your laptops, iPads and handheld devices to class in
order to take notes and participate, but please only use them in a manner that will not disrupt your fellow
peers around you. Please do not use your computer for anything other than activities related to this
biochemistry course when it is underway. Also be sure to turn off your cell phones or put them on silent
before class begins, and do not text-message during the lecture. You have registered in this course and
have made a commitment to be engaged and learn the material, so please do try to be focused during
lectures and problem-solving review sessions. Studies have shown that distractions result in lower grades,
so do focus on the material when you are present in class.
Communication throughout the course: You are responsible for accessing all course materials through
the Blackboard Portal site. Here you will find the lecture notes and discussion board which are set up to
assess and assist with your understanding of the material. Please feel free to post any questions you may
have regarding the course on the Discussion Board so that we may share the information with your peers.
When emailing the TAs directly, please only use your University of Toronto email address. Please
indicate the nature of your inquiry in the subject line preceded by BCH311H. Please begin your email
with Dear: and include your full name and student number so that we may be able to best address your
concern in the utmost respectable manner. Emails to your professors will only be answered during
business hours, so if you require an immediate response, try asking a classmate. Course-related
announcements will also be posted on the Blackboard Portal site so please check in regularly.
Textbook: The readings assigned from the textbook are required. Biochemistry, First Canadian Edition,
R.H. Garrett, C.M. Grisham et al. (2013, Nelson Education) are required. This textbook includes chapter
questions, which may assist with your understanding of the material, and associated readings and problem
sets may be assigned.
The material covered in this course is fundamental to future work you may explore in any field of
biological science, nutrition, molecular biology, medicine, etc. We hope that you enjoy the course and
succeed! We are here to assist you in any way possible, but it is your responsibility to keep on top of the
material. This is a very fast-paced course and your attendance at the lectures is key in assisting your
understanding of biochemistry, the molecular basis of life. -Sincerely the BCH311H teaching team
Lecture Schedule 2014-2015
LEC
#
DATE TOPIC LECTURER
1 Jan 9 Nucleic Acid Structure I Kelley
2 Jan 16 Nucleic Acid Structure II Kelley
3 Jan 23 Techniques to Study Nucleic Acids Kelley
Jan 26 QUIZ (12am -11:59pm)
4 Jan 30 Overview of Nucleotide Biosynthesis Kelley
Feb 5 FIRST TERM TEST (6-7:30pm)
5 Feb 06 DNA Replication I Brown
6 Feb 13 DNA Replication II Brown
Feb 17-
Feb 20
READING WEEK - no classes
7 Feb 27 DNA Repair Brown
Mar 05 SECOND TERM TEST (6-7:30pm)
8 Mar 06 Transcription I and II Andreopoulos
Mar 08
Last Day for Dropping Course Without Academic
Penalty
9 Mar 13 Splicing Andreopoulos
Mar 16 QUIZ (12am -11:59pm)
10 Mar 20 Translation I Andreopoulos
11 Mar 27 Translation II Andreopoulos
Apr 8-30
FINAL EXAM (3 hours) -Date and
Location to be Announced by Arts &
Science
