Department of Mathematics, University of Toronto
MAT223H1S - Linear Algebra I
Winter 2015
Brief Course Description
Welcome to MAT223H1S Linear Algebra I. This sheet answers the most common questions about the course.
Please take a few minutes to read this course information handout carefully and keep a copy for your records.
This is the first undergraduate course in linear algebra taken by students from a variety of disciplines. The
course covers: systems of linear equations, matrix algebra, vector geometry, vector spaces, orthogonality,
rank, introduction to linear transformations, determinants, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, diagonalization
(see pages 5 & 6 for the full list of topics covered and schedule).
Throughout the course, you will have an opportunity to develop your problem solving, reasoning, and logic
skills. Students will be required to be able to solve standard computational problems in each section covered,
understand all definitions and theorems, and be able to do simple, short proofs of particular statements.
You will see some interesting and exciting material in this course. If you run into some trouble along the
way, please do not hesitate to contact your instructor or TA for help.
Lectures/Administrative Information
Section Time Lecture Room Instructor Office
L0101 T1-3, W1 SF 1105 N. Jung ES 4141
L0201 T1-3, R1 MP 202 S. Uppal BA 6110
L0301 T1-3, F1 SS 2135 H. Wu HU 1024
L5101 T6-9 SS 2118 A. Izosimov BA 6172
L5102 W6-9 SF 1105 D. Muthiah HU 912
Course Coordinator: S. Uppal.
Email: uppal@math.utoronto.ca. Please read the Email Policy on page 3 of this document before sending
an email.
Office hours: Wednesdays 17:10-18:30, Thursdays 16:10-18:00 or by appointment. If you would like to
book an appointment outside my regularly scheduled office hours, please send me an email indicating the
times you are available to meet. Also, please give at least 24 hours notice for appointments so that there is
suitable time to make arrangements.
The course Blackboard website is accessible through the main UofT portal at https://portal.utoronto.ca.
All announcements and handouts will be posted on the course website. Please visit the website regularly.
Marking Scheme
Your final grade will be calculated by the following formula:
1 of 6Midterm Exam I & Midterm Exam II - 40% (combined), Quizzes - 10%, Final Exam - 50%.
Textbook
Jeffrey Holt: Linear algebra with Applications, 1st edition. There is also a Students Solution Manual available
should you wish to purchase it.
Tutorials and Quizzes
Every student should be registered in one tutorial section. You must register in one of the tutorial
time slots through ROSI before the end of the first week of classes. After that, please follow the
instructions posted on the course webpage to enrol or switch tutorials. By the end of the second week of
classes tutorial locations will be posted on the course webpage.
Tutorials begin the 3rd week of classes. During your tutorials your TA will discuss ’tutorial problems’ which
will be posted on the course website each Friday before your tutorial the following week. The problems are
based on the suggested homework problems, emphasize the most important concepts, and are meant to help
prepare you for the exams. Feel free to ask questions about the problems you have most difficulty with.
Tutorials are an integral part of the course and should be regarded as just as important as lectures.
There will be a 10-15 minute quiz and the end of almost every tutorial (see pages 5 & 6 for the schedule).
The quiz will consist of one question based on the suggested problems/tutorial problems for that week.
Students are expected to provide their own paper to write the quiz. The marking for the quiz will be out
of 4. The fought marking scheme for quizzes will be as follows: 4 will be given for a perfect answer ; 3 for
incorrect answers that demonstrate a solid understanding of the material but have minor calculation errors;
2 for answers that demonstrate some understanding of the material but are poorly presented and/or have
many calculation errors; and 1 or 0 for little to no understanding of the material. In total, there will be nine
quizzes but only your best six quizzes will count toward your quiz grade. Each student must attend their
assigned tutorial to write their quiz otherwise your grade will be recorded as 0. The material
for the quiz will be posted on the course website each Friday before your tutorial the following week.
Midterm Exams
There will be two 1hr 50min minute midterm exams common to all sections scheduled Friday February 13,
and Friday March 20 from 4:10-6:00pm with an early sitting from 2:10-4:00pm for those with a conflict. If
you have a legitimate conflict and need to register for the early sitting of the exams, contact the course
coordinator. There will be no make-up exams. Exact details about exam coverage etc will be posted
on the website roughly two weeks before the test date.
Midterm I & II account for 40% of your final grade combined. The higher of your two midterm exam grades
will account for 25% of your final grade; the lower 15%. This only applies to students who write both exams.
If you only write one midterm exam due to illness, it will count for 20% of your final grade and your final
exam will count for 70% of your final grade.
If you miss the midterm for a legitimate reason which you can document, your grading scheme will be
adjusted by increasing the final exam component of your mark. The documentation must be submitted to
the course coordinator no later than 7 days after the date of the exam/quiz otherwise your grade for the
exam/quiz will be recorded as zero. From the Faculty of Arts & Science:
”You will need official documentation that confirms you were unable to do what you were supposed to do
on the dates you were supposed to do it, i.e., documentation must indicate incapacity, and give the dates or
period affected. Generally speaking, the stronger your documentation, the stronger your case...Those doctors
notes with Patient was ill or Off work scribbled on little prescription pads wont be accepted. Also, the
2 of 6Medical Certificate must indicate that the doctor diagnosed and treated you when you were ill; it cannot
just report that you told the doctor after-the-fact that you were ill previously.”
Generally, an illness must be serious enough that it prevents you from writing an exam. For example, a
headache is not sufficient to warrant absence. The only accepted note is a fully completed University of
Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury form. You can find a copy of the form here:
http://www.illnessverification.utoronto.ca/
It must be original and completed by a qualified medical doctor (e.g., not an acupuncturist, chiropractor, or
other health care professional). The doctors OHIP registration number must be provided on the note.
Under no circumstances can the final exam count for more than 80% of your final mark.
Questions and Answers Website
We will use Piazza as our online forum for this class. You may ask questions, discuss math, form study groups,
and in general help each other. You may even post anonymously if you prefer. On the class dashboard, you
can post questions and collaborate Wikipedia- style to edit responses to these questions. Instructors may
also answer questions, endorse student answers, and edit or delete any posted content. Piazza has a LaTex
equation editor for simple math formatting. You can also take photos of your written work so you may ask
questions without keying in elaborate expressions. If you have any problems or feedback for the developers,
email team@piazza.com..
You will first need to sign up at piazza.com/utoronto.ca/winter2015/mat223h1s using your @utoronto.ca
email account.
Email Policy
Email correspondence is to be used for non-teaching purposes only. This may include setting up an
appointment with your instructor or clarification of the course structure. I may not respond to an email
which deals with specific questions about course concepts or homework/tutorial problems - please post such
questions on Piazza or ask your instructor after class or during office hours. If the answer to your
question is contained within the course outline or announcement page of the course webpage,
you will not receive a response to your email.
Accessibility Needs
The University of Toronto is committed to accessibility. If you require accommodations for a disability, or
have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please contact Accessibility
Services as soon as possible: disability.services@utoronto.ca or http://studentlife.utoronto.ca/accessibility
Academic Integrity
Academic integrity is fundamental to learning and scholarship at the University of Toronto. Participating
honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in this academic community ensures that the U of T degree
that you earn will be valued as a true indication of your individual academic achievement, and will continue
to receive the respect and recognition it deserves.
Familiarize yourself with the University of Torontos Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters:
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm
It is the rule book for academic behaviour at the U of T, and you are expected to know the rules. Potential
offences include, but are not limited to:
3 of 6In papers and assignments:
• Using someone elses ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement
• Copying material word-for-word from a source (including lecture and study group notes) and not
placing the words within quotation marks.
• Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
• Making up sources or facts.
• Including references to sources that you did not use.
• Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment including working in groups on
assignments that are supposed to be individual work, or having someone rewrite or add material to
your work while editing.
• Lending your work to a classmate who submits it as his/her own without your permission.
On tests and exams:
• Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone.
• Looking at someone elses answers
• Letting someone else look at your answers.
• Misrepresenting your identity.
• Submitting an altered test for re-grading.
Misrepresentation:
• Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including doctors notes.
• Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
The University of Toronto treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously. All suspected cases of academic
dishonesty will be investigated following the procedures outlined in the Code. The consequences for academic
misconduct can be severe, including a failure in the course and a notation on your transcript. If you have
any questions about what is or is not permitted in this course, please do not hesitate to contact me. If you
have questions about appropriate research and citation methods, seek out additional information from me,
or from other available campus resources like the U of T Writing Website. If you are experiencing personal
challenges that are having an impact on your academic work, please speak to me or seek the advice of your
college registrar.
4 of 6Schedule and Suggested Problems
As a general rule, you should try to solve as many problems as possible (in a timely fashion). The more
problems you try, the better your understanding will be. I suggest you attempt to solve, at the minimum,
all the odd numbered questions from the list below. The answers to all the odd numbered questions are in
the back of the textbook (the Students Solution Manual has full solutions to all the odd problems).
Your instructor may be slightly ahead or behind this schedule. This schedule is subject to change.
Week 1 beginning January 5.
Lecture: Systems of Linear Equations.
• Introduction to the course.
• Section 1.1: Lines and linear equations. # 1-60.
• Section 1.2: Linear Systems and Matrices (Elementary operations & Guassian Elimination). # 1-56.
Week 2 beginning January 12.
Lecture: Euclidean Space.
• Section 2.1: Vectors. # 1-80.
• Section 2.2: Span. # 1-74.
Week 3 beginning January 19. Tutorials begin. Quiz 1.
Lecture: Euclidean Space (continued). Matrices.
• Section 2.3: Linear Independence. # 1-66.
• Section 3.1: Linear Transformations R
m → R
n. # 1-66.
Week 4 beginning January 26. Quiz 2.
Lecture: Matrices (continued).
• Section 3.2: Matrix Algebra. # 1-64.
• Section 3.3: Inverses. # 1-70.
Week 5 beginning February 2. Quiz 3.
Lecture: Subspaces.
• Section 4.1: Introduction to Subspaces. 1-72.
• Section 4.2: Basis and Dimension. # 1-68.
Week 6 beginning February 9. Midterm Exam I. Quiz 4.
Lecture: Subspaces (continued). Determinants.
5 of 6• Section 4.3: Row and Column Spaces. # 1-60.
• Section 5.1: The Determinant Function. # 1-82.
Week 7 beginning February 23. Quiz 5.
Lecture: . Determinants (continued).
• Section 5.2: Properties of the Determinant. # 1-72.
• Section 5.3: Applications of the Determinant (skip Cramer’s Rule). # 13-36, 39-62.
Week 8 beginning March 2. Quiz 6.
Lecture: Eigenvalues & Eigenvectors.
• Section 6.1: Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors. # 1-66.
• Section 6.3: Change of Basis. # 1-50.
Week 9 beginning March 9. Quiz 7.
Lecture: Eigenvlaues & Eigenvectors (continued). Orthogonality.
• Section 6.4: Diagonalization. # 1-64.
• Section 8.1: Dot Products and Orthogonal Sets. # 1-72.
Week 10 beginning March 16. Midterm Exam II. Quiz 8.
Lecture: Orthogonality (continued). Vector Spaces.
• Section 8.2: Projection and the Gram-Schmidt Process. # 1-58.
• Section 7.1: Vector Spaces and Subspaces. # 1-28, 33-49
Week 11 beginning March 23. Quiz 9.
Lecture: Vector Spaces (continued).
• Section 7.2: Span and Linear Independence. # 1-54.
• Section 7.3: Basis and Dimension. # 1-58.
Week 12 beginning March 30.
Lecture: Catch-up/Review.
6 of 6