



CSC263H Summer 2014









     body {
        display: block;
	}
    




		(function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
				(i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
			m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
		})(window,document,'script','//www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

		ga('create', 'UA-22411948-1', 'toronto.edu');
		ga('require', 'displayfeatures');
		ga('send', 'pageview');
	





News
Contacts
Overview
Schedule
Tutorials
Homeworks
Exams
Policies
Links
Top







CSC263H - Data Structures and Analysis - Summer 2014
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto






This course has finished.




News


August 20, 2014 - Marks available on ROSI
Have a great summer.

August 14, 2014 - A4 available for pick-up
Assignments can be picked up in the office hours. Marks are uploaded to
	CDF.
Also, please double check all your marks on CDF and contact Larry if
	there is any error.

August 12, 2014 - Office hours before final exam
This Wednesday, Thursday and Friday: 5pm-6pm, and next Monday: 1pm-2pm. (Use them!)
Reminder again: Final exam on Monday August 18, 7pm-10pm, at NR25.

OLDER NEWS




Contacts


Instructor

Larry Zhang
Office: BA5211 (Behind the door of BA5206)
Email: ylzhang AT cs DOT toronto DOT edu


TAs
Recep Çolak, Tom Lee, Roy Luo and Jimmy Zhu

Lectures
Tuesdays 6pm - 8pm, at BA1130

Tutorials
Tuesdays 8pm - 9pm, at BA1130
Attendance in tutorials is as mandatory as attendance in lectures.

Office hours
Wednesdays 4:30pm - 6:30pm, at BA5206

Course Forum
https://piazza.com/demo_login?nid=hspf0pk44cb22p&auth;=b735db1
See the Policies section for details about how to use the course forum.




Overview


Course goals
Data structures are ways of organizing the data involved in
	  computation, suitable for representation in and manipulation by
	  computers.  Algorithms are precisely stated, general problem solving
	  methods.  Data structures and algorithms are central to computer science.
	  They are also integrally related: neither can be studied fruitfully
	  without knowledge of the other. This course has two goals: First, to
	  survey several important data structures and algorithms; and second, to
	  introduce the basic tools and techniques for the analysis of algorithms
	  and data structures.

Textbook
T.H. Cormen, C.E. Leiserson, R.L. Rivest and C. Stein, "Introduction to Algorithms", 3rd edition, MIT press, 2009. (Errata page)
The 2nd edition of the textbook is available to UofT students through the UofT library.
Both the 2nd and 3rd editions are acceptable for this course.

Prerequisites
CSC207H1, CSC236H1/CSC240H1, STA247H1/STA255H1/STA257H1
CGPA 1.5/enrollment in a CSC subject POSt.
See policy on prerequisite waivers.

Marking scheme
Homeworks: 40% (10% for each of the four assignments)
Midterm: 15%
Final: 45% (A mark of at least 40% on the final exam is necessary to pass the course.)

Course Information Sheet
CSC263_S14_INFO.pdf




Schedule


Tentative Weekly Schedule


Date
Topics
Reading
Memo

 Week 1
May 13
 
Review of time complexity of algorithms and asymptotic
					notation; upper and lower bounds on algorithm complexity.
Abstract data types.

 Chapter 1, 2, 3
Notes on bounds
 A1 out 

 Week 2
May 20
 
Priority queues: heaps.
Priority queues: mergeable heaps.

 Chapter 6
Notes on binomial heaps
 

 Week 3
May 27
 
Dictionaries.
Binary search trees; balanced search trees.

 Chapter 12.1, 12.2, 12.3
Notes on AVL trees
 

 Week 4
June 3
 
Balanced search trees (cont'd).
Augmenting data structures.

 Chapter 14
 A1 due
A2 out


 Week 5
June 10
 
Hashing: basic definitions.
Hashing: probabilistic analysis of hashing with chaining.

 Chapter 11 

 Week 6
June 17
 Disjoint sets.
 Chapter 21 A2 due

 June 24
Course break, no class.


 July 1
Canada Day, no class again.

 Week 7
July 8
 
Amortized analysis.
Dynamic tables.

 Chapter 17 Midterm: July 8, 8:10pm - 9:10pm
A3 out
 Week 8
July 15
 
Graphs: basic definitions and data structures.
Graphs: breadth-first search and applications.

 Chapter 22
Notes on BFS
 

 Week 9
July 22
 Graphs: depth-first search and applications.
 Chapter 22 A3 due
A4 out


 Week 10
July 29
 Graphs: Minimum spanning trees and applications.
 Chapter 23, 35.2
Notes on MST
 

 Week 11
August 5
 
Deterministic algorithms with probabilistic inputs
				versus randomized algorithms: Quicksort.

 Chapter 5, 7 A4 due

 Week 12
August 12

 
Lower bounds: decision trees; lower bounds for sorting.
Lower bounds: adversary arguments; lower bounds for the MIN-MAX problem.
 Chapter 8.1, 9.1
Notes on Min-Max
 


Tutorials


Tutorial Notes by Jimmy Zhu
Tutorial 6: Disjoint sets
Tutorial 7: BFS
Tutorial 8: Topological Sort
Tutorial 9: Prim's Algorithm for MST
Tutorial 10: Random Selection




Homeworks


Homework Guidelines (see Policies for details)

Students may work on homeworks individually, or in groups of size two.
Homework submissions must be typed and printed.
Use of LaTeX is recommended. Here is the template for homework solutions.
Submissons must include your name and student number (of both students if working in group).
Submit hard copy with cover page to the CSC263 drop box in BA2220 by 5:40pm on due date.
No late submissions will be accepted.
Graded homeworks will be returned in lectures or tutorials.


Assignment 1, due June 3: 
Download A1 handout with cover page          Solutions and marking schemes

Assignment 2, due June 17: 
Download A2 handout with cover page          Solutions and marking schemes

Assignment 3, due July 22: 
Download A3 handout with cover page          Solutions and marking schemes

Assignment 4, due August 5: 
Download A4 handout with cover page          Solutions and marking schemes




Exams


Midterm
When: July 8, 2014, 8:10pm - 9:10pm (tutorial time)
Where: BA1130
Aids allowed: None
Bring you student card.

Final Exam
When: August 18, 2014, 7pm - 10pm
Where: NR25 (map)
Aids allowed: None
Bring you student card.




Policies


Prerequisites
Prerequisites are strictly enforced in this course. A prerequisite
	  waiver is only granted if the student is able to demonstrate a satisfying
	  level of knowledge of the missing course. If you think you are qualified
	  for the waiver, please send an email to the instructor with the following
	  information (by May 6, 2014):

Your name.
Your student number.
The prerequisite that you are requesting a waiver for.
The reason why you are qualified for this waiver.

The requests will be handled case-by-case. An interview with the
	  instructor may be required.

Course forum policy
We use Piazza
	  as a platform for class discussions. When registering to the course, you
	  must use your @mail.utoronto.ca or @utoronto.ca address as your Piazza
	  email contact for this course. Here are the course guidelines for posting
	  on Piazza:

Take the time to formulate your postings clearly and concisely.
Be courteous in your communications.
Your postings must abide by the academic integrity policy and the
		  homework collaboration policy. In particular, you should not ask for
		  or offer hints on solutions to homework assignments. So posting a
		  question such as "I am using this method to solve this problem, am I
		  on the right track?" is not appropriate as it violates the homework
		  collaboration policy.
Your postings can be made anonymously to other students (at your
		  discretion), but not to the instructor.

The CSC263 teaching team (i.e., the instructor or teaching assistants)
	  will endeavor to monitor the discussions on Piazza a couple of times a
	  week.

Academic integrity
Academic integrity is essential to the University of Toronto and the
	  University treats cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously.
	  Academic offences relevant to this course include using someone else's
	  ideas or words without appropriate attribution; obtaining or providing
	  unauthorised assistance on any assignment, test, or exam; misrepresenting
	  your identity; falsifying or altering documentation; and violating the
	  homework collaboration policy stated below.

Homework collaboration policy
In each homework you may collaborate with at most one other student
	  who is currently taking CSC263H taught by Larry Zhang. If you collaborate
	  with another student on a homework, you and your partner must submit only
	  one copy of your solution (in this case, write both of your names on the
	  cover page of the assignment). The solution will be graded in the usual
	  way and both partners will receive the same mark. Collaboration involving
	  more than two students is not allowed.

Homework submission
Each homework should be given to us, with its cover page, in the csc263
  course drop box in BA2220, by 5:40pm sharp on the homework due date (usually a
  Tuesday). A teaching assistant picks up the homework copies from this drop
  box very shortly after the deadline, and any homework copy left in the drop
  box after this pickup will not be marked (i.e., it will get 0 marks).

Missed homework policy
If you miss a homework deadline because of a medical or serious
	  personal emergency, you must fill out the Special Consideration
  Form and provide it to the instructor as soon as possible.  In case of a
  medical emergency, you must also submit the UofT Verification of
  Student Illness or Injury completed and signed by your physician. Please
  check Frequently
  Asked Questions on UofT Health Services. If we
  judge your reason for missing a homework deadline to be valid, we will use
  the average mark that you achieved in other homeworks as your mark for the
  missed homework.

Remarking policy
If your remarking request concerns a simple addition error, see the
  instructor. If, after reading the marking guide and the solution set of the
  homework carefully, you wish to submit another kind of remarking request, you
  should fill this
  form, attach it to your homework assignment or test, and give it to the
  instructor of the course no later than one week from the date the marked
  assignment or test was made available to the class.  Remarking requests made
  after this deadline will not be accepted.

A remarking request of a homework or a test can cause the overall mark to
  stay the same, increase or decrease: we can re-examine every question to see
  whether: (1) we erroneously deducted points from a correct and clear answer,
  or (2) we failed to deduct points from an incorrect or unclear answer. So we
  can rectify the total mark up or down accordingly.

Please submit a remarking request only if: (a) you have read and
  completely understood the solution set and the marking guide that we posted,
  and (b) you still think that your solution is correct and was mistakenly
  marked as incorrect.

Missed midterm exam policy
If you miss the midterm test due to a medical or other serious personal
  emergency, get in touch with your instructor immediately, fill out the Special
  Consideration and provide it to the instructor as soon as possible. In
  case of a medical emergency, you must also submit the UofT Verification of
  Student Illness or Injury completed and signed by your physician. Please
  check Frequently
  Asked Questions on UofT Health Services. There
  will be no make-up midterm test, but if we judge your reason for missing the
  test to be valid, we will use your final examination mark to compute your
  mark for the missed midterm test.




Links


CDF Website: For checking your grades of assignments and tests.
Faculty of Art & Science important dates
Old exams repository at UofT library
Getting Started with LaTeX (and many more resources can be found using a search engine)
TeXLive: a cross
	  platform LaTeX distribution.




  © 2014 Larry Yueli Zhang | Top 



